[DOCS] Adds docs to semantic text (#108311)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/search/search-your-data/semantic-search-semantic-text.asciidoc

[[semantic-search-semantic-text]]
=== Tutorial: semantic search with `semantic_text`
++++
<titleabbrev>Semantic search with `semantic_text`</titleabbrev>
++++

beta[]

> This tutorial show you how to use the semantic text feature to perform semantic search on your data.

Reviewer: Suggestion: "this tutorial shows you how"

> This tutorial show you how to use the semantic text feature to perform semantic search on your data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows you how to use the semantic text feature to perform semantic search on your data.
```

Semantic text simplifies the {infer} workflow by providing {infer} at ingestion time and sensible default values automatically.
You don't need to define certain settings and parameters or create {infer} ingest pipelines.

The recommended way to use semantic search in the {stack} is following the semantic text workflow.
When you need more control over the settings, you can still use the complete {infer} workflow (refer to  <<semantic-search-inference,this tutorial>> to review the process).

This tutorial uses the `elser` service for demonstration but you can use any service and their supported models offered by the {infer-cap} API.

[discrete]
[[semantic-text-requirements]]
==== Requirements

> To use `semantic_text` field type, you must have an {infer} endpoint deployed in

Reviewer: Suggestion: "To use the `semantic_text` field type"

> To use `semantic_text` field type, you must have an {infer} endpoint deployed in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use the `semantic_text` field type, you must have an {infer} endpoint deployed in
```

your cluster using the <<put-inference-api>>.

[discrete]
[[semantic-text-infer-endpoint]]
==== Create the {infer} endpoint

Create an inference endpoint by using the <<put-inference-api>>:

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------

> PUT _inference/sparse_embedding/my-elser-model <1>

Reviewer: Suggest we rename this to `my-elser-endpoint` to avoid confusion about what's a model and what's an inference endpoint

{
  "service": "elser", <2>
  "service_settings": {
    "num_allocations": 1,
    "num_threads": 1
  }
}
------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]
<1> The task type is `sparse_embedding` in the path as the `elser` service will
be used and ELSER creates sparse vectors. The `inference_id` is
`my-elser-model`.
<2> The `elser` service is used in this example.

[discrete]
[[semantic-text-index-mapping]]
==== Create the index mapping

The mapping of the destination index - the index that contains the embeddings

> that the model will create based on your input text - must be created. The

Reviewer: Suggestion: "that the inference endpoint will generate"

> that the model will create based on your input text - must be created. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that the inference endpoint will generate based on your input text - must be created. The
```

destination index must have a field with the <<semantic-text,`semantic_text`>>

> field type to index the output of the used model.

Reviewer: Suggest replacing "model" with "inference endpoint"

> field type to index the output of the used model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
field type to index the output of the used inference endpoint.
```

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------
PUT semantic-embeddings
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "semantic_text": { <1>
        "type": "semantic_text", <2>
        "inference_id": "my-elser-model" <3>
      },
      "content": { <4>
        "type": "text",
        "copy_to": "semantic_text" <5>
      }
    }
  }
}
------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]
<1> The name of the field to contain the generated tokens.
<2> The field to contain the tokens is a `semantic_text` field.
<3> The `inference_id` is the inference endpoint you created in the previous step.
It will be used to generate the tokens based on the input text.
Every time you ingest data into the related `semantic_text` field, this endpoint will be used for creating the vector representation of the text.
<4> The field to store the text reindexed from a source index in the  <<semantic-text-reindex-data,Reindex the data>> step.

> <5> The textual data stored in the `content` field will be copied to `semantic_text` and processed by the {infer} task.

Reviewer: Suggest replacing "inference task" with "inference endpoint"

> <5> The textual data stored in the `content` field will be copied to `semantic_text` and processed by the {infer} task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<5> The textual data stored in the `content` field will be copied to `semantic_text` and processed by the {infer} endpoint.
```

> The `semantic_text` field will store the tokens generated based on the input data.

Reviewer: This may be a nit, but I thought we wanted to stay away from referring to ELSER output as "tokens". Should we generalize this to "embeddings"?

Reviewer 2: Fair point Mike, ++

==== Load data

In this step, you load the data that you later use to create embeddings from it.

Use the `msmarco-passagetest2019-top1000` data set, which is a subset of the MS
MARCO Passage Ranking data set. It consists of 200 queries, each accompanied by
a list of relevant text passages. All unique passages, along with their IDs,
have been extracted from that data set and compiled into a
https://github.com/elastic/stack-docs/blob/main/docs/en/stack/ml/nlp/data/msmarco-passagetest2019-unique.tsv[tsv file].

Download the file and upload it to your cluster using the
{kibana-ref}/connect-to-elasticsearch.html#upload-data-kibana[Data Visualizer]
in the {ml-app} UI. Assign the name `id` to the first column and `content` to
the second column. The index name is `test-data`. Once the upload is complete,
you can see an index named `test-data` with 182469 documents.

[discrete]
[[semantic-text-reindex-data]]
==== Reindex the data

Create the embeddings from the text by reindexing the data from the `test-data`
index to the `semantic-embeddings` index. The data in the `content` field will
be reindexed into the `content` field of the destination index. Then the same

> data will be copied to the `inference_content` field as a result of the

Reviewer: This is inconsistent, the field name is `semantic_text` earlier in this doc. I like `inference_content` as a field name better (because it's different than the name of the field type), can we change to use `inference_content` throughout the doc?

Author: It was `inference_content` throughout the docs, then it was [requested](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/108311#discussion_r1610191161) to change it to `semantic_text` to simplify it. I just missed this occurrence.

`copy_to` parameter set in the index mapping creation step. The copied data will

> be processed by the {infer} task associated with the `inference_content`

Reviewer: Suggest replacing "inference task" with "inference endpoint"

> be processed by the {infer} task associated with the `inference_content`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be processed by the {infer} endpoint associated with the `inference_content`
```

semantic text field.

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------
POST _reindex
{
  "source": { 
    "index": "test-data"
  },
  "dest": {
    "index": "semantic-embeddings"
  }
}
------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]

The call returns a task ID to monitor the progress:

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------
GET _tasks/<task_id>
------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]

It is recommended to cancel the reindexing process if you don't want to wait
until it is fully complete which might take several hours:

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------
POST _tasks/<task_id>/_cancel
------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]

[discrete]
[[semantic-text-semantic-search]]
==== Semantic search

After the data set has been enriched with the embeddings, you can query the data
using semantic search. Provide the `semantic_text` field name and the query text

> in a `semantic` query type. The {infer} endpoint used to generate the tokens for

Reviewer: "tokens" -> "embeddings"

the `semantic_text` field will be used to process the query text.

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------
GET semantic-embeddings/_search
{
  "query": {
    "semantic": { 
      "field": "inference_content", <1>
      "query": "How to avoid muscle soreness while running?" <2>
    }
  }
}
------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]
<1> The `semantic_text` field on which you want to perform the search.
<2> The query text.

As a result, you receive the top 10 documents that are closest in meaning to the

> query from the `semantic-embedding`index:

Reviewer: Missing a space between "`semantic-embedding`" & "index"

> query from the `semantic-embedding`index:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
query from the `semantic-embedding` index:
```

[source,consol-result]
------------------------------------------------------------

> ------------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: Do we plan to add results here?

[[semantic-search-semantic-text]]
=== Tutorial: semantic search with `semantic_text`
++++
<titleabbrev>Semantic search with `semantic_text`</titleabbrev>
++++

beta[]

This tutorial show you how to use the semantic text feature to perform semantic
search on your data.

Semantic text simplifies the {infer} workflow by providing {infer} at ingestion
time and sensible default values automatically. You don't need to define certain
settings and parameters or create {infer} ingest pipelines.

> The recommended way to perform semantic search in the {stack} is following the

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't say this is the recommended way but the way to start:

```suggestion
The recommended way to start using semantic search in the {stack} is following the
```

> semantic text workflow. However, if you need more control over the settings, you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
semantic text workflow. When you need more control over the settings, you
```

[discrete]
[[semantic-text-infer-endpoint]]
==== Create the {infer} endpoint

Create an inference endpoint by using the <<put-inference-api>>:

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------
PUT _inference/sparse_embedding/my-elser-model <1>
{
  "service": "elser", <2>
  "service_settings": {
    "num_allocations": 1,
    "num_threads": 1
  }
}
------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]
<1> The task type is `sparse_embedding` in the path as the `elser` service will
be used and ELSER creates sparse vectors. The `inference_id` is
`my-elser-model`.
<2> The `elser` service is used in this example.

[discrete]
[[semantic-text-index-mapping]]
==== Create the index mapping

The mapping of the destination index - the index that contains the embeddings
that the model will create based on your input text - must be created. The
destination index must have a field with the <<semantic-text,`semantic_text`>>
field type to index the output of the used model.

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------
PUT semantic-embeddings
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {

>       "content_inference": { <1>

Reviewer 2: I wonder if using semantic_text directly would be more evident. In the end, the main goal of using semantic_text is to simplify. If users need to use two fields and copy_to, we may be defeating that purpose. WDYT?

[[semantic-search-semantic-text]]
=== Tutorial: semantic search with `semantic_text`
++++
<titleabbrev>Semantic search with `semantic_text`</titleabbrev>
++++

beta[]

> This tutorial shows you how to use the semantic text feature to perform semantic search on your data.

Reviewer 3: Can we create a notebook that goes through these steps and link to it here?

Author: Yes, creating a notebook is on my TO-DO list. I'll do it in a separate PR and publish it after the tutorial docs. Will update the documentation with the link after that.

Semantic text simplifies the {infer} workflow by providing {infer} at ingestion time and sensible default values automatically.

> You don't need to define certain settings and parameters or create {infer} ingest pipelines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You don't need to define model related settings and parameters, or create {infer} ingest pipelines.
```

> The recommended way to use semantic search in the {stack} is following the semantic text workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The recommended way to use <<semantic-search,semantic search>> in the {stack} is following the `semantic_text` workflow.
```

> When you need more control over the settings, you can still use the complete {infer} workflow (refer to  <<semantic-search-inference,this tutorial>> to review the process).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you need more control over indexing and query settings, you can still use the complete {infer} workflow (refer to  <<semantic-search-inference,this tutorial>> to review the process).
```

> This tutorial uses the `elser` service for demonstration but you can use any service and their supported models offered by the {infer-cap} API.

Reviewer 3: Link to ELSER docs?

Author: Added via [6a086bc](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/108311/commits/6a086bc02815060ae56a3320aea9e0ab23d413c9).

> This tutorial uses the <<inference-example-elser,`elser` service>> for demonstration but you can use any service and their supported models offered by the {infer-cap} API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tutorial uses the <<inference-example-elser,`elser` service>> for demonstration, but you can use any service and their supported models offered by the {infer-cap} API.
```

[discrete]
[[semantic-text-load-data]]
==== Load data

In this step, you load the data that you later use to create embeddings from it.

Use the `msmarco-passagetest2019-top1000` data set, which is a subset of the MS
MARCO Passage Ranking data set. It consists of 200 queries, each accompanied by
a list of relevant text passages. All unique passages, along with their IDs,
have been extracted from that data set and compiled into a
https://github.com/elastic/stack-docs/blob/main/docs/en/stack/ml/nlp/data/msmarco-passagetest2019-unique.tsv[tsv file].

Download the file and upload it to your cluster using the
{kibana-ref}/connect-to-elasticsearch.html#upload-data-kibana[Data Visualizer]
in the {ml-app} UI. Assign the name `id` to the first column and `content` to
the second column. The index name is `test-data`. Once the upload is complete,
you can see an index named `test-data` with 182469 documents.

[discrete]
[[semantic-text-reindex-data]]
==== Reindex the data

Create the embeddings from the text by reindexing the data from the `test-data`
index to the `semantic-embeddings` index. The data in the `content` field will

> be reindexed into the `content` field of the destination index. Then the same
> data will be copied to the `semantic_text` field as a result of the `copy_to`

Reviewer 2: I think it's better to remove `then`, as it may imply that it is a separate step.
```suggestion
be reindexed into the `content` field of the destination index. 
The `content` field data will be copied to the `semantic_text` field as a result of the `copy_to`
```

parameter set in the index mapping creation step. The copied data will be
processed by the {infer} task associated with the `semantic_text` semantic text
field.

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------
POST _reindex?wait_for_completion=false
{
  "source": { 
    "index": "test-data",
    "size": 10 <1>
  },
  "dest": {
    "index": "semantic-embeddings"
  }
}
------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]
<1> The default batch size for reindexing is 1000. Reducing size to a smaller
number makes the update of the reindexing process quicker which enables you to
follow the progress closely and detect errors early.

The call returns a task ID to monitor the progress:

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------
GET _tasks/<task_id>
------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]

> It is recommended to cancel the reindexing process if you don't want to wait

Reviewer 3: Maybe start with a smaller dataset for the example so it's guaranteed to be fast?

Author: All semantic search-related tutorials use the same dataset. I plan to find something smaller (around 2000-5000 data points) and amend all the tutorials to use that smaller set. However, it's an effort of an upcoming sprint, so I'd rather go ahead with this content and adjust all the docs later in one go.

> until it is fully complete which might take several hours:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
until it is fully complete which might take a long time for an inference endpoint with few assigned resources:
```

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------
POST _tasks/<task_id>/_cancel
------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]

[discrete]
[[semantic-text-semantic-search]]
==== Semantic search

After the data set has been enriched with the embeddings, you can query the data
using semantic search. Provide the `semantic_text` field name and the query text
in a `semantic` query type. The {infer} endpoint used to generate the embeddings
for the `semantic_text` field will be used to process the query text.

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------
GET semantic-embeddings/_search
{
  "query": {
    "semantic": { 
      "field": "semantic_text", <1>
      "query": "How to avoid muscle soreness while running?" <2>
    }
  }
}
------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]
<1> The `semantic_text` field on which you want to perform the search.
<2> The query text.

As a result, you receive the top 10 documents that are closest in meaning to the
query from the `semantic-embedding` index:

> [source,consol-result]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[source,console-result]
```

Create the embeddings from the text by reindexing the data from the `test-data`
index to the `semantic-embeddings` index. The data in the `content` field will
be reindexed into the `content` field of the destination index. Then the same
data will be copied to the `semantic_text` field as a result of the `copy_to`
parameter set in the index mapping creation step. The copied data will be

> processed by the {infer} task associated with the `semantic_text` semantic text

Reviewer: ```suggestion
processed by the {infer} endpoint associated with the `semantic_text` semantic text
```

<2> The query text.

As a result, you receive the top 10 documents that are closest in meaning to the
query from the `semantic-embedding` index:

[source,consol-result]
------------------------------------------------------------
(...)
"hits": [
      {
        "_index": "semantic-embeddings",
        "_id": "6DdEuo8B0vYIvzmhoEtt",
        "_score": 24.972616,
        "_source": {
          "semantic_text": {
            "inference": {
              "inference_id": "my-elser-endpoint",
              "model_settings": {
                "task_type": "sparse_embedding"
              },
              "chunks": [
                {
                  "text": "There are a few foods and food groups that will help to fight inflammation and delayed onset muscle soreness (both things that are inevitable after a long, hard workout) when you incorporate them into your postworkout eats, whether immediately after your run or at a meal later in the day. Advertisement. Advertisement.",
                  "embeddings": {
                    (...)

>                   }
>                 }
>               ]
>             }
>           },
>           "id": 1713868,
>           "content": "There are a few foods and food groups that will help to fight inflammation and delayed onset muscle soreness (both things that are inevitable after a long, hard workout) when you incorporate them into your postworkout eats, whether immediately after your run or at a meal later in the day. Advertisement. Advertisement."
>         }
>       },
>       {
>         "_index": "semantic-embeddings",
>         "_id": "-zdEuo8B0vYIvzmhplLX",
>         "_score": 22.143118,
>         "_source": {
>           "semantic_text": {
>             "inference": {
>               "inference_id": "my-elser-endpoint",
>               "model_settings": {
>                 "task_type": "sparse_embedding"
>               },
>               "chunks": [
>                 {
>                   "text": "During Your Workout. There are a few things you can do during your workout to help prevent muscle injury and soreness. According to personal trainer and writer for Iron Magazine, Marc David, doing warm-ups and cool-downs between sets can help keep muscle soreness to a minimum.",
>                   "embeddings": {
>                     (...)
>                   }
>                 }
>               ]
>             }
>           },
>           "id": 3389244,
>           "content": "During Your Workout. There are a few things you can do during your workout to help prevent muscle injury and soreness. According to personal trainer and writer for Iron Magazine, Marc David, doing warm-ups and cool-downs between sets can help keep muscle soreness to a minimum."
>         }
>       },
>       {
>         "_index": "semantic-embeddings",
>         "_id": "77JEuo8BdmhTuQdXtQWt",
>         "_score": 21.506052,
>         "_source": {
>           "semantic_text": {
>             "inference": {
>               "inference_id": "my-elser-endpoint",
>               "model_settings": {
>                 "task_type": "sparse_embedding"
>               },
>               "chunks": [
>                 {
>                   "text": "This is especially important if the soreness is due to a weightlifting routine. For this time period, do not exert more than around 50% of the level of effort (weight, distance and speed) that caused the muscle groups to be sore.",
>                   "embeddings": {
>                     (...)
>                   }
>                 }
>               ]
>             }
>           },
>           "id": 363742,
>           "content": "This is especially important if the soreness is due to a weightlifting routine. For this time period, do not exert more than around 50% of the level of effort (weight, distance and speed) that caused the muscle groups to be sore."
>         }
>       },
>       (...)

Reviewer: Can we fix indentation here?

```suggestion
  {
    "_index": "semantic-embeddings",
    "_id": "6DdEuo8B0vYIvzmhoEtt",
    "_score": 24.972616,
    "_source": {
      "semantic_text": {
        "inference": {
          "inference_id": "my-elser-endpoint",
          "model_settings": {
            "task_type": "sparse_embedding"
          },
          "chunks": [
            {
              "text": "There are a few foods and food groups that will help to fight inflammation and delayed onset muscle soreness (both things that are inevitable after a long, hard workout) when you incorporate them into your postworkout eats, whether immediately after your run or at a meal later in the day. Advertisement. Advertisement.",
              "embeddings": {
                (...)
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      },
      "id": 1713868,
      "content": "There are a few foods and food groups that will help to fight inflammation and delayed onset muscle soreness (both things that are inevitable after a long, hard workout) when you incorporate them into your postworkout eats, whether immediately after your run or at a meal later in the day. Advertisement. Advertisement."
    }
  },
  {
    "_index": "semantic-embeddings",
    "_id": "-zdEuo8B0vYIvzmhplLX",
    "_score": 22.143118,
    "_source": {
      "semantic_text": {
        "inference": {
          "inference_id": "my-elser-endpoint",
          "model_settings": {
            "task_type": "sparse_embedding"
          },
          "chunks": [
            {
              "text": "During Your Workout. There are a few things you can do during your workout to help prevent muscle injury and soreness. According to personal trainer and writer for Iron Magazine, Marc David, doing warm-ups and cool-downs between sets can help keep muscle soreness to a minimum.",
              "embeddings": {
                (...)
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      },
      "id": 3389244,
      "content": "During Your Workout. There are a few things you can do during your workout to help prevent muscle injury and soreness. According to personal trainer and writer for Iron Magazine, Marc David, doing warm-ups and cool-downs between sets can help keep muscle soreness to a minimum."
    }
  },
  {
    "_index": "semantic-embeddings",
    "_id": "77JEuo8BdmhTuQdXtQWt",
    "_score": 21.506052,
    "_source": {
      "semantic_text": {
        "inference": {
          "inference_id": "my-elser-endpoint",
          "model_settings": {
            "task_type": "sparse_embedding"
          },
          "chunks": [
            {
              "text": "This is especially important if the soreness is due to a weightlifting routine. For this time period, do not exert more than around 50% of the level of effort (weight, distance and speed) that caused the muscle groups to be sore.",
              "embeddings": {
                (...)
              }
            }
          ]
        }
      },
      "id": 363742,
      "content": "This is especially important if the soreness is due to a weightlifting routine. For this time period, do not exert more than around 50% of the level of effort (weight, distance and speed) that caused the muscle groups to be sore."
    }
  },
  (...)
```
